[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios, podcasts,
radio, news, Joe one and Joe 2. I always
>> Which one is which?
>> Yeah, I have to remember that. Um, well,
you can answer whenever you want.
>> Okay, that sounds good.
>> All right,
>> I might just sit back with this one. I
might just listen to the I might just
listen to Joe's answers and then listen
to your questions, which would be better
than mine.
>> I did a deadlift. I am both the most
popular trader and most successful
trader at Citadel.
>> Feta is going viral.
>> Uh barges.
>> This is an after school special except
>> I've decided I'm going to base my entire
personality going forward on campaigning
for a strategic pork reserve in the US.
>> Black gold.
>> These are the the important questions.
Is it robots taking over the world?
>> No, I think that like in a couple years
the AI will do a really good job of
making the OddLots podcast. One day that
person will have the mandate of heaven.
How do I get more popular and
successful?
>> We do have
>> the perfect guest.
>> Welcome to Lots More, where we catch up
with friends about what's going on right
now.
>> Because even when OddLots is over,
there's always lots more.
>> And we really do have the perfect guest.
>> I think we've been lying to our
listeners and our viewers.
>> Go on. This is intriguing.
>> We keep saying the Fed is raising or
lowering interest rates.
>> Yeah. Oh, I like this. I see. I already
see where you're going with this.
>> But actually, there's this whole
constellation of rates and we never
really specify which one.
>> It's less of a lie and more of an
omission etc. It is true, especially at
the short-term level that they're all
these different rates and they sort of
get abstracted away because I guess they
can be arbed one way if there's between
the two if they ever deviate. So the Fed
can influence these other rates and
obviously generally strongly does but
it's no guarantee that all these
short-term rates always converge
identically.
>> No. And we have seen for instance
instances where the market rates have
gone far far outside what the Fed is
actually targeting. So I should just say
when the Fed raises or lowers interest
rates it does it through well it targets
the Fed funds rate. Okay? And I think
everyone has heard of that. But the way
it mechanically does it has changed over
time. In fact, it changed in a pretty
big way early on in our financial
journalistic careers. So, we should
definitely talk about it. Who's the guy
that we call when we want to talk money
markets and mechanics of interest rates?
>> Go on.
>> It's Joe Abate.
>> I'm really excited. Let's do it.
>> Joe has actually left Barclays after
more than 28 years and he's now at SMBC
Nico. He's head of macro strategy. So,
we're looking forward to uh hearing even
more from him. Uh Joe, talk to us about
how the actual mechanics of raising
changing rates has changed over time. So
originally the Fed started with a scarce
reserve regime and the idea was that the
level of liquidity in the system was
always kept a little bit short of what
banks really wanted to hold and that
created a little bit of torque in this
interbank market, the Fed funds market.
And that allowed the Fed to move the Fed
funds rate to exactly where it wanted to
set the target. and the target was set
at a pinpoint level of interest rates.
Over time, and certainly beginning in
about 2008, the Fed shifted to a
different format. And in that format,
the Fed would supply an ample or
abundant level of reserves and let the
Fed funds rate, you know, trade or at
least in this case not trade at some
spread or band between an upper and
lower band where it set the target. And
originally, it set the target range band
because it wasn't confident that this
new structure would keep the Fed funds
rate close to a pinpoint level. But if
you supply an abundant level of reserves
into the system, what happens is the Fed
funds market changes fundamentally.
>> It adapts.
>> It adapts. And as it adapted, what
happened was banks stopped trading in
the Fed funds market. They didn't need
to borrow reserves anymore
>> because there were plenty there.
>> Because there were plenty. Exactly.
>> So the market kind of devolved into
basically an interest rate arbitrage.
You have one set of borrowers and one
set of lenders. The borrowers in this
market are generally non US banks and
the lenders are the home loan banks. And
the reason there's this distinction is
because the home loan banks can't earn
interest on their reserve on their cash
balances at the Fed. So they have an
incentive to sell their cash right into
the Fed funds market to non US banks who
are simply making the spread between Fed
funds and IRB and in an ample reserve
>> IRB oh interest on reserves okay
>> reserve balances and that spread has
been very very stable for the last
probably four years or so at minus minus
seven basis points because the Fed's
been operating in an abundant reserve
regime. The abundant reserve regime
first came about because of QE, right?
So, you expanded the Fed's balance
sheet, created all these reserves, so
banks were oversted with liquidity.
>> I'm going to ask a question that's going
to sound very negative, but it's not.
It's actually I mean it very literally
because I think this might help us
understand why we're having this
conversation. Who cares?
Who cares about the
>> any of this? And I do and again I do not
mean this in like a dismissive way. I
mean all of these things like these
short-term things that basically are
equivalent. They could be armed away.
The Fed seems to have a lot of control
over these markets. In the end, even if
it's not targeting one or the other, the
short-term interest rate is basically
where the Fed wants it by any of these
measures. So literally, who cares about
the plumbing? So the reason you I think
care about the plumbing is that the Fed
uses it to communicate its policy
intentions. So it needs some sort of
barometer, some sort of measure for the
market to be able to interpret what the
Fed's intentions are. So there's a
two-fold
implication, if you will, for the Fed
funds market. One is the Fed uses the
Fed funds rate to communicate its policy
intentions. So raising rates, lowering
rates, and it uses the dot plot, for
example, defined as the Fed funds rate
to provide forward guidance to tell the
market how far we're going or what we
see as the endgame potentially for
interest rates.
>> And the second element is kind of more
of a mechanical one, which you're
referring to as the plumbing. Yeah.
which is how does the Fed's intentions
get translated into bank deposit rates,
mortgage rates, etc.
>> Right? And one way to think about this
is that all of these term interest
rates, tenure yields, etc. are all a
reflection of what your expected path of
the Fed is,
>> right? Defined as Fed funds plus some
premium, right, to reflect the term risk
that you're taking or inflation risk,
etc. And therefore there's a linkage
between the overnight rates, the
communication of policy and how it's
transmitted to the broader financial
market system.
>> I do think in terms of signaling the
central bank's actions, it is kind of
funny that you know we're so used to
thinking of the Federal Reserve as a
very targeted institution, but when
we're talking about reserves, the
language they use is like excess
abundant apple. And there's no hardcore
definitions of what those actually are.
But I should just say the reason we are
talking about this is because everyone
in money markets is talking about this
right now because Lori Logan at the
Dallas Fed, she did a speech last week
and a paper I think basically saying
that the US, the Fed should move away
from targeting Fed funds and look at
some different ways of targeting rates
basically. Was that a surprise to you
when you read the speech?
>> It was a little bit of a surprise since
we didn't really think that the Fed was
preparing to actually change policy
rates, but the overall reasons for why
they might have to move away from a Fed
funds target are pretty well known. So
again, as I described the Fed funds
market earlier, right, you've got one
set of borrowers, one set of lenders.
It's become kind of a Roman lake, right?
The provinces around the Mediterranean
all spoke Latin. So in effect, right,
there's not a lot of activity going on
between the Fed funds market or the
reason to borrow. So it just becomes a
communications device. So if you move to
a different barometer, let's say a
triparty repo rate, and we can go into
details about what exactly that means.
So, one that would be based on an active
market,
>> correct? You would get not only the
communications element, but you'd also
get a feedback on how well the Fed is
doing in managing liquidity.
>> Now, if reserves are always abundant, I
don't really need that information,
right? I know that reserves are
abundant, but if I want to run an
efficient balance sheet for the Fed, in
other words, one that's not any larger
than it needs to be to control interest
rates, then I have to kind of bring down
the level of reserves in the system and
monitor as I bring down the level of
reserves, what's happening with
liquidity in the overall system. Is it,
as you said, is it staying within the
bands or is it moving outside those
bands? and creating other sorts of
distortions and that's why I need
hopefully a market traded instrument and
that would be in this case the repo
rate.
>> What is the cost of running an
inefficient balance sheet or a balance
sheet that has more reserves than are
theoretically necessary? Like okay,
what's so bad about that?
>> You're very existential to me.
>> No, for real. Like I've heard this
before. They want to get it right. But
like from an actual when we think about
the Fed's goals, right, which is
ultimately, and you described it, it's
about transmitting policy, these dual
mandates and all this stuff. What is the
cost from the Fed's purpose? It's razone
debt of running a having a few extra of
these tokens in the system.
>> Why are we here, Joe? Yeah,
>> Joe one.
>> Well, no, cuz like Yeah. No, because if
we need to switch to X because we want
to get a better read on the efficiency
of our balance sheet, that implies that
balance sheet efficiency is an important
thing.
>> So, I agree with you. I'm personally
not opposed to a big balance sheet. I
would argue that having plenty of
reserves in the system increases the
safety of banks, right? They have more
liquidity. that particular type of
liquidity is immediately available,
right? Because bank reserves can be
accessed a immediately whereas
monetizing treasuries requires either
repoing them, going to the discount
window or selling them in the market. So
ample is probably
where you should be targeting. An
inefficient balance sheet would be one
where you could argue that banks are
overstocked with reserves. And because
they're overstocked with reserves,
the cost of those reserves for them is
low. And anything that's low
in price, you have an incentive to hold
more than you probably need. So from an
efficiency argument, you might argue
that banks because they've been over
supplied with bank reserves, their
demand for those reserves is excessive
and they should be holding, you know,
kind of more treasuries and other
assets. The other example of this is if
you have a bloated Federal Reserve
balance sheet, right, during, for
example, QE, right, you create other
sorts of distortions in the market. So
during QE what we saw was that bank
demand for loans or loan demand was weak
right and the Fed was pushing all these
reserves into the system. Banks ended up
with lots and lots of deposits. These
deposits were uninsured right and they
were very rate sensitive so that when
the Fed began raising interest rates
that cash left
>> very quickly as in March of 23. Mhm.
>> At the same time, the cash on their
balance sheet was crowding out their
fixed amount of capital, right? So, you
were basically holding more cash than
you wanted to and you were rolling it
into securities because loan demand
wasn't there. And so you had a balance
sheet that became more heavily skewed
toward this is the banks skewed toward
treasuries,
lots of cash and more flightprone
liabilities. So when the Fed began
raising interest rates,
>> everything
>> became unglued or became more volatile.
There was also I think a populist
component for a time where people used
to get upset that like the foreign banks
were earning lots of interest on their
reserves and things like that. Do you
remember? I
>> I do. I actually remember even earlier
than that where there was work done
about who was benefiting from the
liquidity programs in the financial
crisis. And there were in fact some news
agencies filing Freedom of Information
Act requests to find out exactly who
used what facility and how much.
[Music]
Okay, I have to ask why the trip party
rate and not something like sofur, the
secured overnight financing rate, which
I thought, you know, that's supposed to
be the de facto benchmark money market
rate, the one that replaced Liebore.
>> That's right. I think the main
distinction is because the triparty rate
or the triparty market itself is a pure
financing market. It's the market in
which the dealer community is raising
cash from cash providers like money
market funds. By contrast, sofur is a
little bit broader because it includes
the bilateral repo market. And because
it includes the bilateral repo market,
that's more of a market where people are
looking for financing as well as
specific QIPS or specific treasury
securities. So they may have the left
shoe, but they're looking for the right
shoe,
>> right?
>> And because of that, you basically have
two different equilibria in the market.
You have a triparty equilibrium and then
you have a sofur bilateral equilibrium.
And what Lori Logan was arguing is that
that creates kind of a bifurcated
distribution where the incentives to
trade in one market may not be the same
as in the other more smaller triparty
market. The result is that you may be,
you know, looking at a at an an average
or a volume weighted median across all
of these markets. that doesn't actually
reflect what's going on in the market.
>> So what is the prospect of something
fundamental changing and what the Fed
targets? Okay, Lori Logan gives a
speech, but that's just a speech. And
then if there were going to be some
change in what instrument or what
measure the Fed targets, you know, what
are the technical challenges with the
new implementation?
>> So the short answer to that is I don't
know. What I would say is that my sense
is that it's probably sooner than people
think. Lori Logan is given her past
career at the New York Fed and the SOM
or the, you know, kind of the
implementation desk at the Fed probably
has a lot of weight in terms of how the
mechanics of monetary policy run. As far
as the other members of the FOMC, I'm
not sure what their opinions are because
nobody's really discussed this in the
past. So I would say that probably
sooner rather than later, but something
that's not going to happen, you know,
let's say within the next two years.
>> Okay.
>> Mechanically, you know, there have been
certainly in my career, the Fed has,
you know, targeted the Fed funds rate
for the entire period of time, but the
way it communicates what it's targeting
has changed. So when I started the Fed
used to do daily operations
and what kind of daily liquidity
operation there were fine distinctions
between them that would indicate how
much the Fed was expecting the Fed funds
rate to move up or down. Then in 94 you
know they basically came out and said
that we're going to target the rate
itself. Mhm.
>> And then after that in I think it was
'95 they actually started publishing the
target rate in the FOMC minutes
>> because it used to just be you had to
you would just intuitive right it would
just it would arrive there and then they
would figure out what the target was.
Yeah.
>> Yeah. They used to use expressions like
expected to put modest pressure on
reserve conditions or
>> because the Fed has such a track record
of successfully targeting a rate. Has
that reduced the pressure to actually
trade in the market because the word is
so good?
>> Uh I'm going to say no. I I think that
the reason there's no trading in the Fed
funds market partly, as I said earlier,
is that you know because it's a Roman
lake of sorts. It's kind of a negotiated
interest rate. It's not really a traded
rate. But I mean the what I meant is
like does the Fed does it not need to
intervene directly as much the way it
did in the old days because everybody
knows that it can achieve it and so the
market will take care of any deviations.
>> Yes, I think that's partly true. I think
that
you know that was originally the reason
why they had a band around the target
because they weren't sure in 2008 that
they could achieve that. in the
subsequent years. Yes, they've kind of
eliminated the fine-tuning that they
would need to do to get the Fed funds
rate to the target.
>> Okay. On the topic of nebulous Fed words
though, whether it's modest or something
like ample, reserves in the system are
still ample, but they are also falling.
And meanwhile, we've seen some repo
rates going up recently. Uh we had the
September 15th tax day. I guess
September 30th quarter end. There was a
lot of concern that we might get, you
know, some sort of repo apocalypse as we
used to call it. That hasn't really
materialized. But would you say overall
the price of liquidity is going up?
>> Yes, I totally agree with that. So
reserves may be ample at the moment but
their price is going up because the
amount of that ampleness is getting
smaller and smaller and there are
variety of reasons why it's getting
smaller and smaller. One of them is QT
the other was the resolution of the debt
ceiling which you know encouraged the
Treasury to kind of target a higher cash
balance for precautionary reasons. There
was a speech recently by Hunter McMaster
about what the Treasury's cash balance
target or goal or desired level is,
which is 5 to 7 days of expected
outflows. And so they want to maintain
an ample balance in their checking
account, but the Treasury's checking
account is held at the Federal Reserve,
and that acts as a liability for the
Fed, so it drains reserves as the
balance goes up. So all of these factors
have kind of been moving and up until
now most of the decline in the Fed's
balance sheet has shown up as a shift
out of the reverse repo program which is
meant to mop up excess reserves and the
treasury's account. Now what's happening
is that there's nothing left in the RRP
program and as the balance sheet shrinks
further it comes out of reserves. as it
comes out of reserves, the effect is
kind of disproportionate, if you will.
Most of the reserve loss that we've seen
has come from foreign banks. Foreign
banks are the ones who are trading in
the Fed funds market. So, their cost of
liquidity is going up, right? Their
bargaining power in this, you know,
negotiation has deteriorated and they
have to pay an extra basis point and
that's what we've seen in recent days.
>> Last question for me. you seen any
interesting have any interesting
thoughts these days about stable coins
or how that interacts with some of these
markets? So the idea behind the stable
coins is as a payment mechanism, right?
That they look similar to a money market
fund and because they're similar in
structure to a money market fund, the
idea is that they would have to buy
short duration assets, right? They'd
have to buy Treasury repo, they'd have
to buy Treasury bills. So the goal or
the intent is that if demand for stable
coins goes up, the demand for bills will
go up and therefore the treasury will
find a new buyer for treasury bills and
it could issue more treasury bills
without pushing interest rates up,
right? And if your goal hypothetically
is to
increase bill supply but reduce the
supply of term debt in order to keep
term interest rates from rising. Yeah.
>> Then you need a new large buyer of
treasury bills, right? That buyer
theoretically could be stable coins or
at least a payment token of some sort.
The problem of course is that when the
demand for payment tokens goes up, it's
taking away from the demand other
>> other instruments that people use for
making payments.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. Deposits,
>> right?
>> Credit cards and paper currency.
So my sense at least from looking at
this and having thought about it
somewhat is I think of the payment
tokens as a closer substitute for
currency than a
you know than a bank deposit.
If you think about currency generally,
right, there's I think the average
onperson currency
amount is about $60, but per capita
currency in the US is something like
$7,000 or more. So there's a significant
volume of US currency that's held
offshore, right? Some estimates between
58 58 of US currency is held offshore.
There are 19 billion $100 bills out
there.
>> 19 billion $100 bills?
>> Yes.
>> So,
>> I have none of them.
>> No, I have a few.
>> Oh, really?
>> Yeah. From the last time I played poker.
>> Do you keep them in your wallet?
>> I have them in my bedside drawer.
>> So, you're part of the exception rather
than the rule. But my point being that a
payment token probably the demand for it
may be higher outside the US than inside
the US because you have all lots of ways
of making fast payments. Where it might
be more attractive is in underbanked
economies that are able to access mobile
phones. And so all things being equal,
you could say it is a substitute for the
$100 bill as a store of value and a unit
of account. And in that case then you
could potentially see strong demand for
payment tokens but they would be located
outside the US. The other area would be
with respect to remittances. Right.
>> Right. So sending money abroad. Again
much easier to do with a payment token.
Making purchases theoretically using
your credit card and a non US currency
sometimes
can get hard partly because of
anti-fraud and other uh mechanisms. If
you used a stable coin, that might be
easier. But the problem, of course, is
that a stable coin used in that way is
just like using money, right? Or paper
money, right? Once it's gone,
>> right?
>> You can't call your credit card company
and say, "Stop that payment."
I'm going to squeeze in one more
question on swap spreads, which was
actually the original reason why I
reached out to you, but then Lori Logan
made her speech and we got very
distracted. But swap spreads, there's
something going on there, which is they
seem to be widening, not just in the US,
but basically all around the world. So,
Australia, Japan, Canada, I think. What
is going on there? And why should we
care about swap spreads? So, I'm not an
expert on swap spreads, but I will say
is that there's a general global theme
about fiscal prudence, if you will, and
that the amount of government debt
outstanding is increasing and doesn't
seem to be going anywhere but up. The
result of that is that people demand a
premium for holding that government
debt. And that's what we're seeing here,
which is that that premium has started
to rise. Now initially in the US the
sense was that after the certainly in
April of this year that premium was
expected to be higher but I think what
happened in the US was that people
recognized that
the deterioration in the fiscal outlook
was not a uni a unique US phenomena
right it was occurring across the board
certainly in the countries among the
countries that you were mentioning. So I
think there's a
I don't want to call it bond
vigilanteism because I don't think
that's what's going on but there is a
realization that fiscal policy is moving
in presumably an unsustainable
direction.
>> Although weirdly the UK one hasn't moved
that much.
>> Yeah, I know. They got so much
excitement at the beginning of September
and then it's uh it's been kind of
chill.
>> Yeah. Well, we'll see what happens.
Lots more is produced by Carmen
Rodriguez and Dashel Bennett with help
from Moses Andom and Kale Brooks.
>> Our sound engineer is Blake Maples. Sage
Bowman is the head of Bloomberg
podcasts.
>> Please rate, review, and subscribe to
OddLots and lots more on your favorite
podcast platforms.
>> And remember that Bloomberg subscribers
can listen to all of our podcasts adree
by connecting through Apple Podcasts.
Thanks for listening.